Like most people don't know that this
exists that there was this revolution in
math in the 19th century that kind of
changed the way that we think about math
but the beginnings of it were born out
of this question of trying to solve
polomial equations and realizing hey
maybe it's impossible but like pure
mathematicians for a while were curious
okay hey how how far can we take this
and between the 1500s when this was kind
of initially being explored with the
cubic and everything up to around the
1800s people tried but no one could find
a way to answer that wait you tell me
people had these thoughts thoughts in
the 1500s while others were disembowing
heretics. Yeah, it's these two things
coexisted. It's it's wild to contrast
history of science. Yeah.
[Music]
This is Star Talk Cosmic Queries
edition. Got Chuck Nice with me. Chuck,
how you doing, man? I am doing great.
Yeah. Yeah. This one is going to be on
math. Oh, I was told there would be no
math.
That's
[Music]
Nobody told you there was going to be no
math. That's right.
I I know some math, but if we're going
to have math as a subject, we got to
bring on the big guns, right? Especially
the mathiest of the math.
We've got with us, not his first time on
Star Talk, Grant Sanderson. Grant,
welcome back. Hey, thanks for having me
again. It was fun the first time. Let's
see how it goes. Excellent. Excellent.
So you have sort of academic chops in
math and in computer science. All right.
Those are related on some levels. And
you took it to the road. I mean, you
took it to YouTube. Yeah. With a highly
followed channel, three blue, one brown.
Can you get more cryptic than that? Yes.
It sounds uh sounds like a threecard
Monty's meme. That's right.
How long have you had the channel, man?
It's been around 10 years now, which uh
feels a little wild. Yeah. And how many
followers? followers you have. It's it's
it's around 7 million. Um I remember
sometime recently across the you know
that's that's monumental in terms of
accomplishment. No no I'm just saying
you got 7 million people to follow you
for math math. That's what I'm saying.
Exactly. If 7 million people that gives
us gives me hope for the future of
civilization. Yeah. That gives me hope
for those seven million people
but not for the future of the rest.
In general more people like math than
people suspect. I think like it's a
little bit it's a little bit of an
underdog. Everyone thinks people hate
it, but like I think everyone loves
math. I just think that most people are
intimidated by it and intimidate and and
nobody wants to feel stupid. I like
feeling dumb. That's why I'm on this
show. I'm always the dumbest person on
this show. But that's why Grant exists
so that he can uh grow the comfort zone
that people feel. look at you when
encountering this content. Yes. So, let
me pick up some some some broad deep
topics in math before we get to our Q&A.
We we hear occasionally about problems
in math. And no, they're not talking
about what's 8* 7. No, they're talking
about problems that the deepest thinkers
in the field have attempted to solve
over the centuries,
right? Is there is there like a a a a a
book of the latest unsolved problems in
math and then that's what uh nerd geeks
should Yeah. should check out of the
library first? Yeah. Yeah. I mean
there's there's there's been many. I
mean one of the most famous um bodies of
unsolved problems. Uh in the year 2000
the Clay Math Institute put out these
seven problems that they offered a $1
million prize for. And so these ones are
kind of the celebrities among unsolved
problems. They're called like the clay
millennium math problems. They are
typically very hard to even describe
what the problem is stating. Um, so very
classic. You can't even describe the
problem of the problem you're supposed
to solve, right? You got to solve the
problem, but you can't even describe.
Nobody can tell you what the problem is.
Now, to me, sir, that's how you keep
your million dollars. Yes. I was going
to say that sounds a lot like being
married, you know.
But what is the problem even that we're
beginning to solve? Um, so but there
there's also these celebrity unsolved
problems that are in some sense less
important, but they're easier to state
and as a result they're a lot more fun
to just engage with for the for the
public. But there's there's no prize
money for those, right? Like not in the
explicit sense that there is a
particular institute that like put this
check behind it, but like abs if you
solved any of these problems, you gain a
certain fame within the math world.
Probably you're doing it as an academic
where it really bolsters your career.
like there's there's plent if you want
financial rewards there's like plenty
that would come if you could um solve
one of these problems but of course
that's not what most people care about.
Are they arise purely within math or is
there some scientific a pumping of what
these problems are or engineering
solutions? Yeah. So I'll give you one
that's purely within math um and then
some that are more like come from the
outside world. Um, and this first one,
it's near and dear to me because I
remember when I was, I don't know, maybe
11 or so, my dad from across the
kitchen, he like pipes over. He's like,
"Hey, Grant. Um, you know, prime
numbers." I'm like, "Oh, yeah, prime
numbers." The like you numbers that you
can't divide into two smaller pieces.
Like 6= 2 * 3, but seven you can't break
it up into two smaller pieces. He's
like, "Yeah, do you think there's
infinitely many of them that are just
two apart?" So like 11 and 13 are primes
that are two apart, or 29 and 31 are a
pair of primes that are two apart. Um,
and he was asking this cuz he was
reading some news article that
mentioned, hey, this is an unsolved
problem. His dad asked him this
question, this question when he was 11.
Oh, wow. So, either you were really
smart or you had a really bad dad.
So, I'm just letting go and think I'm
like, oh, like, is this true? And
eventually, it didn't take too long for
him to say like, oh, this was a thing I
was reading about in this like science
news magazine that like mentioned this
is a problem nowhere no one in the world
knows how to answer. And that was
fascinating to me. Like here's here's a
question you can ask. Like you teach
kids about prime numbers. Maybe not
everyone remembers them when they grow
older, but like it's a common topic. Um
all you're asking is hey are there
infinitely many that are two apart? Do
they ever stop coming um spaced out by
two? And you know that primes get a
little sparer like as you get much
bigger there's fewer of them. Um but you
might wonder do they stop clumping up in
that way? Uklid asked this over two
millennia ago. We still don't know the
answer. And it's it cuts pretty deep
like to the um understanding of primes
that we have and the lack of
understanding to be able to answer
questions like this. So that's pure
math. Okay. It's just a puzzle. Hey, you
got one from science. Yeah, that's
great. Yeah. I mean, so one that's um
more I'm not going to be able to state
the exact nature of this question, but I
can give you like the high level
overview, which I know Neil, you're
going to know this, but um there's a set
of equations that describe fluid flow.
They're very famous. They're called the
Na'vi equations. Yeah. Yeah. And so if
you're if you're just modeling some
fluid and you um understand certain
aspects of its you know pressure and
viscosity and things like this there's
something for example you could tell the
computer to try to run forward a
simulation. Um but the theoretical
understanding of these equations is like
worryingly thin in some respects where
for example it's not entirely known if
um it would imply that like you get an
infinite concentration of energy at some
point. You don't like clearly that
shouldn't happen. You don't think that
would happen in the in the physical
world, but the mathematical model being
used in the pure landscape of what are
called differential equations, it it's
got these properties where people aren't
sure whether it falls one way or
another. Um, and it's actually very very
hard to understand the specific type of
differential equation. And so again, I
won't phrase the specific nature of the
question that's unsolved, but broadly
speaking, it's some basic questions
about do these equations behave in the
way that you would hope they would
behave. No one actually knows. And this
is clearly motivated by modeling physics
and modeling the world. Now you also
have a category of problems that are
unsolvable
yet you have people who think that they
solved it. Right? So you you can prove
that something's unsolvable. Correct?
Everyone might have seen in school the
quadratic equation. Um so this is
something where if you have an
expression that looks like x^2 plus some
constant* x plus some constant equals 0
and you want to solve it. It's a
systematic way to do it. This is an
equation that comes up all the time for
engineers. Um, all the times in in like
computer graphics programming, just
solving equations like this left and
right. And so there's a formula. A lot
of kids memorize it in school. It's
called the quadratic formula. This is a
formula that has been known for a really
long time. Chuck, recite the quadratic
formula. Do you remember it? Here's the
quadratic formula. Uh, what you get for
number 13?
Looking over the shoulder. But so I mean
it's it was I remember getting drilled
into us on a level where it prevented me
from appreciating what it was actually
doing, right? It was just a memorizable
formula. It was like B plus or minus the
square root of B ^2 minus 4 A C over 2
A. Did I get that right? That's exactly
right. Yeah. Okay. Okay. I just did that
by wrote, not cuz I had freaking feeling
for it. You just had to know it so many
times. Yeah. I got it from eighth grade.
It came in. Okay. Here's something you
should be thankful for. So there exists
a formula to solve any cubic equation,
but our our teachers never made us
memorize it. It's much longer. Yeah. And
it it would be it takes a much longer
song to do it. And if they think the
quadratic formula is this thing that
would cause a wrote engagement with math
instead of a substantive one, forcing
kids to memorize the cubic would be even
worse. Um but like pure mathematicians
for a while were curious. Okay. Hey, how
how far can we take this? you know, do
can we have a formula that solves any um
equation where the highest power of x is
x to the 4th? And you can. It's an even
it's an even more monstrous uh formula.
If you tried to write it down in full,
it would just fill like an entire page,
this formula that solves degree 4. And
for a long time, the natural question
is, okay, can we solve any degree 5
equation? Um, and between the 1500s when
this was kind of initially being
explored with the cubic and everything
up to around the 1800s, people tried,
but no one could find a way to answer
that. Wait, you tell me people had these
thoughts in the 1500s while others were
disembowing heretics.
Yeah, it's these two things coexisted.
It's It's wild to contrast history of
science. Well, maybe they stopped by the
1500s. The the Renaissance was kicking
in. Exactly. I'm thinking maybe like the
dark ages. Mhm. Well, you go to the
right part of the world. You know, one
person's contemplating cubics, you can
definitely find another part of the
world where disembowings happen. Just
skipping to the punch line here, and
I'll tell a little bit more story behind
it. The answer ended up being um it's
literally impossible in the appropriate
sense. Like, if you're trying to write a
formula using the usual symbols that we
do, plus minus times divide, maybe you
allow for roots and things like that. If
these are the operations at your
disposal, you will literally never be
able to write down a formula for degree
5 or higher. And um two very young
mathematicians were the ones to make the
initial steps in this. It works up to
fourth order polinomial but not fifth.
And then suddenly five it stops. Yeah.
Stops working. Wow. And there's a deep
reason why. Um and the the discovery of
this was one of the things that gave
birth to a huge part of modern math
which is called abstract algebra. Like
most people don't know that this exists
that there was this revolution in math
in the 19th century that kind of changed
the way that we think about math. But
the beginnings of it were born out of
this question of trying to solve
polomial equations and realizing hey
maybe it's impossible once you get above
a certain point. What's the reason? Why
does it why does the symmetry break
between four and five? Neil I would love
so much to be able to like give you the
pathy answer that's like here's what's
true at four that's not true at five.
Um, and I have struggled for years to
think, is this something I could do in
even like a 50inute video or something
that like compellingly describes it to I
want a full YouTube video on my desk
Monday morning of you explaining this.
It would it would make me and a lot of
other people very happy. Okay, I'm going
to give I'm going to give an answer that
uh will will make no sense, but I
promise that there's some sense in which
this is true. It's something called
Galwa theory. Um and the one of the
young mathematicians who came up with uh
the arguments that led to explaining
this, his name was Everest Gowa. He died
in a duel at the age of 20. This is his
big headline fact. He knew he was going
to lose that duel. And so the night
before the duel, he like does like a
brain dump on on the page. Oh, this is
the this is the story. This is the
classic story that we all tell in the
lecture halls. That's insane. Yeah.
Okay. Wait, let let the man explain. Go
ahead. No, no. So, well, what you're
saying is what everyone hears when
they're learning physics and learning
math and whatnot. Like, he wrote down
all the So, he did he like was compiling
stuff that he had tried to get published
like three or four times before. So, the
stuff he had written the stuff down
before. He had gotten it in front of
very famous mathematicians like Forier
or Koshi and Pan like they had seen the
beginnings of his work before. So, it
wasn't like the first time he's ever
jotting this down was in the like crazed
pre-duel state. But, it's such a good
story to tell it that way, right? It's
so good to be like he knew he's going to
die. Uh, you know, so he's got to get
these ideas out in some way. He's got
this classic story behind him in terms
of the duel and all that, but the math
that he was doing, one of the things
that it showed is that it's impossible
to solve equations degree five or
higher. It also showed other
impossibilities. There's this classic
problem about um tricing the angle using
a straight edge and compass to take any
angle and divide it into three pieces.
His theories, his like new math can
prove that that's not possible. Um, it's
it's simply too hard to describe right
here over a podcast, but it it gave
birth to a whole field of math that is
both central to math and also particle
physics these days. Wow. Cool, man.
Well, math is the language of the
universe, so we shouldn't be surprised
if it's spillage into cosmic discovery.
Yeah, makes sense. So, can we bring
questions your way from our audience?
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Let's do it. Uh here's
the first question from uh Buck Rice who
says, "Why can't we divide by zero?"
Why? I love that. That's a great
question. I've carried that with me my
whole life, right? Because the answer
is, well, it's undefined. And so my
response is, well, define, right? Get
off your douff and define it. Yeah,
exactly. Define it. And you know who
does? Uh the mathematicians. Actually,
there are parts of math um one in
particular called projective geometry
where uh one of the objects in there is
essentially what we want to get at by
the idea of 1 divided by 0. And the
thought is if you have a number line and
you walk infinitely far either to the
left or to the right, there's this
unified point that you're approaching
called the point at infinity. Um and you
can do useful math by by defining that.
And it that's kind of what you're
getting at when you have this notion of
one divided by zero. But if you're not
doing that and you want to say like why
isn't it defined? It depends on what
you're doing with division, right? If if
what you want to say with division is
like, I have, you know, I have one
cupcake and I'm dividing it among three
people. How many does each of them get?
You're like, a third of a cupcake. If I
have one cupcake and I'm dividing among
zero people, it's like it's an
incoherent question. Like the cupcake's
got to go somewhere. The fact that that
question is incoherent is maybe what we
mean by saying that it's undefined. See,
but that's that's my point in practical
terms. I have one cupcake and I want to
divide it between zero people. We got to
go back to the beginning of the
statement. I have one cupcake. Okay. And
that's the answer chunk. The answer is I
eat the cupcake.
Now it's defined. Now it's defined. All
right. This message is brought to you by
Apple Card. Apply for Apple Card today
and start earning up to 3% daily cash
back on everyday purchases. And that
daily cash can even grow automatically
when you open a high yield savings
account through Apple Card. What are you
waiting for? Visit
apple.co/card calculator today to see
how much daily cash you can earn subject
to credit approval. Savings available to
Apple Card owners subject to
eligibility. Savings and Apple Card by
Goldman Sachs Bank USA member FDIC.
Terms and more at
applecard.com. This is Kira. Uh,
actually I'm going to combine two
questions in one because Kira and Gavin
Bamber actually are similar, but I'm
going to read both their questions
successfively so you can answer them.
Okay. Hi, this is Kira from Georgia in
the US. Uh, in your opinion, what is the
most fascinating unsolved mathematical
problem in cosmology that if understood
could fundamentally change how we view
the universe? Hold that. Gavin Bamber
says, "Hey, Gavin here from North
Vancouver. Uh, please visit Neil. Uh
what's your favorite unsolved math
question and how would you illustrate
it? So one uh fundamentally change the
way we view the universe and then part
B. What is your personal uh favorite
unsolved? Wait, you can't say one and
then part B. It's either one and two or
A and B. No, see what I am doing is a
new kind of math.
[Music]
Tell you what, I'm going to punt off
part one to Neil here because um I I'll
have some humility here. I'm not sure
what the most important mathematical
problems of cosmology are. I'm not much
of a cosmology person, so I'm curious
what you say. We have singularity
problems in the universe, right? What
all of our equations tell us that at the
center of a black hole, nature is
dividing by zero, right? Okay.
Everything goes the denominator goes to
zero. Right. What happens to the value
of everything else? We say there's
infinite density and infinite this and
that doesn't even make any sense. No, it
doesn't. So, what we don't know, but we
suspect is that that's a limit to the
application of our theory of the
universe, not a limit to the invocation
of the math. Right? Cuz we're not the
first to blame the math. I'm just
saying. Gotcha. Because math is badass
and we're not. Okay? So, we're going to
take the blame first.
But it is true that certain discoveries
in math have led the discoveries in
astrophysics. We had no need for non
uklidian geometry until we did. And so
this is the the curvature of spacetime.
It's not flat. And ukitian geometry is
flat. And and and who who came up with
curved geometry? So Remon is the big one
there. So, so Remon and when was that?
Like 1800s sometime? Yeah, it was in the
1800s. Um, like maybe 50s, let's say.
Okay. All right. So, 19th century, uh,
we have the tools to think about curved
geometry. That was immediately uptook
by, uh, the cosmologists to think about
what could be the geometry of the
universe. You needed a way to talk
about. So, that's all I got here. But
it's it's it's the math leading us, not
us finding a math problem that's not
solved. Well, I mean, you bring up Reman
talking about non-remanian geometry, but
he's also the source of how I was going
to answer the the part B of that
question for one of my favorite unsolved
problems. There's part one and then part
B, part one and part B. So, Remon um you
know, he he he did a lot of geometry
stuff. He also was one of the fathers
for complex analysis, basically using
complex numbers um to solve other
problems within math. And he had one
paper on number theory. So that's the I
described prime numbers earlier like
this twin prime conjecture. um he has
this one paper that he puts out I think
it's 1857 um about prime numbers
otherwise he doesn't do any number
theory and it completely changed the
whole field because he basically said
hey here's this continuous function it
doesn't feel like it's about primes that
are all discreet it's very like
continuous it's got complex numbers that
makes it very different and if you
understand this function you completely
understand the primes um these days we
call it the reman zeta function because
he used the Greek letter zeta um and he
and he basically said, "Hey, we can
really really well understand how the
primes are distributed, um, if we
understand something about this
function." And he put this conjecture up
about where all the if you want to solve
when this function equals zero. He
didn't know how to solve it. He had a
guess for where those solutions are. And
this is called the Remon hypothesis. He
was hypothesizing it. It's one of those
million-dollar problems. And it clearly,
it's a very, very beautiful question
because it's kind of asking like if the
prime numbers form a chord in a certain
sense because it studies them based on
frequency information. And nobody knows
how to answer it, but the more you dig
into this question, it paints a really,
really beautiful picture. Is that your
favorite unsolved problem? I think it's
my favorite. Yeah, I think. Wow. Okay.
It sounded like it was, too. You make it
sound very elegant as a He sounded a
little bit excited as he was talking
about it. I love it. Yeah. Okay. All
right. This is Tony Isaac. And Tony
says, "Good day, Astro Nail and Lord
Nice. This is Tony here from Melbourne,
Australia." Melbourne. Melbour
Melbourne. Um, he says, "Love the show.
Uh, go on Chuck and do an Aussie
accent." Okay, that's somebody who's
been listening to the show for a while.
Listening too long. Yeah. Yeah. It
totally telegraphed me. All right. He
says, "I have a complex problem. Um,
it's the complex number I. It's the
square root of -1, which doesn't exist,
but it is used in so much math that
predicts things accurately, including
quantum. It fries my brain. I hope Neil
and Grant can help me out. Thanks.
Yeah. So, so Grant, I'm going to lead
off by saying, why did you label those
numbers imaginary?
My god, it's the worst name in all of
our worst name ever. Gaus proposed
calling them lateral numbers which would
have been you know a little better and
then and then then you add another
aspect to the imaginary number to get
the complex number and now you call it a
complex these are words that are
complete turnoffs and I blame you. Well,
I mean, if that's your IBM, you're
people. I was going to say if that's the
case, then we need to go all the way
back to the beginning because we call
them math problems. And who wants to
deal with problems? I mean, the so many
people struggle with this, right?
Because you label it as imaginary. You
you start by pitching it by saying, you
know, square roots of negatives don't
exist, but pretend like they do and run
forward. And like you could you could
teach the whole topic completely
differently where you start off by
talking about processes that cycle and
trying to model processes that cycle and
using our normal number systems for
that. Um and anything that has cyclic
kind of behavior uh there's a natural
number system to try to describe that.
Call that number system what you want.
Oh. So so you can think of them as like
clocks then. Think of them as clock
numbers, right? Anytime you're doing
clock stuff, these numbers they're going
to be great. So we use the clock
numbers. Why are they relevant in
quantum mechanics? You got a bunch of
waves, right? There's things that are
cycling. Um, and there's frequencies
that are relevant. You've got like E= HF
type stuff. When there's frequencies,
you should suspect that complex numbers
are there. It's useful in electrical
engineering. Why? Cuz you're dealing
with a bunch of waves. You've got a
bunch of cyclical processes and
frequencies. And so, it's natural to
model them with these kinds of numbers.
So, the engineers adopted the complex
plane, the complex numbers after the
fact, right? They didn't say, "Gee, we
need a way to do this. Let's invent it."
They said, "We don't know how to do
this." And a mathematician comes up.
Here's a way. I mean, is that I'm of
course I'm exaggerating that. I mean, do
you want to know where complex numbers
came from originally? Um cuz I think
it's sort of a lie that we tell in in
schools where we say, you know, there's
no such thing as a square root of
negative, but like pretend like there
is. And like mathematicians just love
pretending things. It actually cuts to
something we were talking about earlier,
which is when people were solving cubic
equations and they wrote down a cubic
formula that thank God neither of us had
to memorize. I I don't thank God for
that.
I'm very picky about what I thank God
for. Thank math. Thank the the education
system. But uh like if you would ask
someone, hey, solve the equation x^2 +
1= 0. Um they would have said there is
no solution. Like obviously there's no
we're not going to make up a solution.
That won't do anything. But there were
certain cubic equations where when you
tried to use the formula, you had a real
number answer. So real numbers in, real
numbers out. Never any whiff of the like
square roots of negatives. But when you
use the formula, you can find that real
valued answer if you take seriously the
idea that somewhere inside that formula
there's a square root of a negative and
it all cancels out at some point. But
like while you're working it out, you're
engaging with these square roots of
negatives. So for a while for
mathematicians they're like oh it's this
one weird trick that like kind of works.
I don't know what it means but it seems
to work for solving cubics. Um and I
think one of the reasons they were
called imaginary is because it took a
long time for people to take them
seriously. They just thought it was this
notational trick and they like the word
imaginary was kind of derogatory. It
wasn't like hey we want to teach kids
this. What should we call it? It was it
it was like imaginary girlfriend.
But then it took much longer for people
to realize how they're useful and the
idea that they have these like cyclic
properties that make them really useful
for any kind of math that invol or
physics that involves waves and cycles.
And so that's what we're stuck with.
Hello Dr. Tyson Lord Nice. Mr. Brown,
this is Brandon from New Jersey. Is
there any relation between the uh
conformal geomet geometry and the
Pythagorean theorem? Recently, I've
learned about some circle inversions,
and it seems to me that these inversions
are leveraging the Pythagorean theorem
to maintain the symmetry of points
across a line after curving it. Is this
at work in conformal geometry as well?
I'm completely confused, but wow, what
what what do you get out of that? Wow,
look at that, man. Let me just answer
Brandon for a second. All right. Stop
showing off, man.
Stop showing off. This is not the place.
All right. Go ahead. If this were a
lecture hall, this would be the time.
I'm like, Brandon, let's talk after
class. It's going to be you and me at a
blackboard. The lesson will be better
for everyone if we don't engage with
what you want to engage with right now.
If you wanted, we can try describing
what conformal geometry and circle
inversion are, but All right. Can you do
it in 20 seconds as a challenge? And if
we understand it, who cares? If not,
then we now we have something to go look
up, which is even more fun. Go ahead.
All right, go. When you look at yourself
in the mirror, you see a reflection of
yourself. It's like a different version
of yourself. Sometimes you can use that
to solve problems like solving your hair
uh do and things like that. In
mathematics, there's a different kind of
mirror that sometimes they use where
they pretend like a circle is a mirror
and it reflects everything from the
inside to the outside and the outside to
the inside. It's the special
transformation of space. And there's
certain geometry problems where they
look hard, but then when you reflect it
through a circle like this, which is a
really weird mind warping motion, it
turns the hard problem into an easy
problem. That's called circle inversion.
Some of the aspects about that I I can't
describe conformal geometry, but that's
what circle inversion that's the vibe of
it. And we won't describe specific
problems there, but if you're curious on
the vibe, it's treating a circle as a
mirror. Cool.
That was fascinating. I mean, I don't I
get with the circle inversion what
you're talking about. I don't know what
it's used for and I don't understand.
Yeah. Yeah. I got to give actual
examples for that to carry teeth, but
you know, a little too long. He was
still showing off though. Yeah, he's
showing off without a doubt. Brandon was
showing off. Okay. But guess what? I'm
glad I'm I'm glad, you know, I never
even heard of conformal geometry until
just this moment. So, I'm happy that
Brandon was showing off because it's now
it's fodder for lookup, which is great.
Ethan Steppp and Ethan says hello Dr.
Tyson and Mr. Grant and and Lord Nice if
you're there.
Hello. I love these people, man.
Freaking love these people. He says, "My
name is Ethan from North Carolina. I
love math, but sometimes I wonder how
these things get figured out. My
question is, how on earth did someone
come up with tensor products?" Okay, I
think the easiest way to describe it
that doesn't quite capture what it's
about, but like a vector, we have a list
of numbers that you might write as like
a column of numbers. A matrix, you've
got this two-dimensional grid of numbers
used in computer science all the time.
It's how machine learning works. But
sometimes you want a three-dimensional
grid of numbers just as the way to hold
your data. Uh, imagine like a
threedimensional grid. Each cell in that
grid has a number. You might call that a
tensor. That's the like computer
scientist way to answer what a tensor
is. Um but then in physics the the use
of certain objects which can be
represented with tensors like this um is
relevant for general relativity and
describing the curvature of space. Um
there's also other corners of math where
you have uh objects that could be
described like you could give them a
coordinate system where you want to have
like a threedimensional grid of numbers
like this. And to answer the question
like where did this come from or who
would come up with it, I think usually
it's it's once there's a very specific
problem that you're dealing with where
you realize the data that represents
this um is something that naturally
organizes itself into like a
three-dimensional grid or a higher
dimensional grid of numbers. It's just a
natural way to try to even hold that
idea in your head. But somebody's got to
be clever enough to see that need and
then come up with it, right? Not
everyone is that clever. there would be
a prisoner of the known math of the day
and you need someone who can step out of
that and say I have a new way to think
about this problem. I mean some some
physicists will joke that one of
Einstein's greatest contributions to
physics was his notation for tensors.
Um, and like he had a really nice
notation for how how to even write it
down, which lets you think about it
clearly on a blackboard and such, which
is a joke of course, but it does cut to
the fact that they're a central object
that it takes a clever mind to even like
represent in a a useful and manipulable
way. This is not TIG, is that? Yeah.
This is what when you're like the
Einstein summation notation where you
want to um Yeah. Yeah. It's a simplified
thing. It makes it makes the equation
look way simpler and more tame than
what's actually going on. Well, I'm
going to tell you, you guys just u made
it look way simpler to me because I have
no idea what you're talking about. Okay.
I'm
I'm just going to be honest. Uh I'm
sitting here and it's rare that I am
lost when a conversation, but this one
is like out there, man. Which is very
cool. So, he Well, plus he's got 7
million followers on his YouTube, so
he's doing something right. He's doing
something right. All right. Yeah. Hi
Grant. Hello Dr. Tyson. Uh I'm Akiya and
I'm originally from India but I live in
San Francisco. I heard the last podcast
when Grant was on and I was on my way to
Death Valley for a dark sky festival for
stargazing and it was a delightful
experience. We stopped along the way at
a cafe and had a lovely cup of tea. I
had jarging. My friend Mary had no I'm
making this part up. I'm like, "Thanks,
Akiyah, for including all of your
information about your trip." My
question to you, Grant, is uh why is
there no new revolutionary paradigm in
mathematics like calculus and algebra
that is uncovered today as opposed to
the last millennium when many fewer
people were working on mathematical
problems? Thank you so much for both of
you uh and for popularizing science. It
sounds like a disc. Where's the next
branch of math? Right. What's up with
that? You guys have done nothing.
I mean, there's definitely been a ton of
development in math and new fields
developed. Um, even like most of the new
ma most of the math that exists. So,
okay, algebraic geometry, there's this
very interesting phenomenon that's been
happening in the last century or so, but
even the latter half of that, if if
someone tried to think of like a grand
unified theory of math, something where
you're trying to understand what are
these weird connections that come up in
seemingly very disperate parts, um the
uh one one of those fields that tends to
take that perspective, kind of stepping
back and saying, hey, what if what if
prime numbers and like functions were
really living in the same kind of world
and the facts that we know about one,
tell us facts about another. Um, a lot
of the people doing algebraic geometry,
that kind of fits in there. You also
have a pretty big revolution in the way
that people think about math where there
is a thing that's called category
theory, which is extremely hard to
explain. Uh, and it's kind of like a
language. It's sort of like a new
language with which mathematicians think
about their work that didn't exist a 100
years ago. It's very much a different
like way of thinking and it's just
quietly happening among these circles.
Not in a way that's very popularized.
It's never going to show up in your high
school calculus class. But it's
absolutely like a new thing. Okay. But
you're saying there it exists within
math, but none that have shown up in our
K through2 textbook. Nor should they.
Like I don't think you should shove
category theory into a K through2
textbook. I got to say what Grant's
doing right now is uh he's throwing
shade at all those mathematicians back
there that Akia is talking about. He's
like, "Our stuff is so complex right now
that Yeah. You can't even learn it."
Okay.
No. Okay. Only three people can learn it
in the whole world. That's it, baby. No.
I know you're joking. I know you're
joking, but I hate when this is kind of
how things come across as like, oh, this
is so comp. It's more like So, you have
certain people doing a certain job like
a research mathematician trying to find
proofs. This is tools for that job. It's
it's not a great tool for other jobs
like maybe writing programs and and
using mathematical modeling for the like
simulation that you're running. Not as
good a tool for that job. but for their
job of writing proofs. It's like here's
this new tool. It's coming to invention.
Once you want to pursue that job, hey,
we can make it as approachable as we
want. But because I don't think everyone
should do that job, like we shouldn't we
shouldn't put it into K12. And there's a
ton of stuff that's too complex to
describe that's vocational, right? If
you want to understand like the exact
way that injection molding works or
something like that. It might be
something that's inappropriate for a
podcast, not because it's like high
fallutin, you know, super math brain.
It's just because, hey, things that are
very peculiar to one job tend to involve
a lot of assumed jargon and a lot of
assumed context from the people learning
it. And it's just not meant to be. Akea,
guess what? It's there, but it's not
necessary for you on a need to know
basis. You don't need to know basis, a
there we go. All right. This is Gina.
She says, "Hello, smarty pants." Uh, I
was okay. I love it. She says, Gina
Martin says, I was recently learning
about circles and pi. I learned that the
circumference of a circle can never be a
whole rational number. I am having such
a hard time wrapping my head around
this. Pun intended. Wrapping my head
around. Okay. Uh, could you please
explain this a little better for me?
Thanks, Gina from North Carolina.
Wait, wait, wait, wait. Is she correct?
She can't can't you have the diameter be
an irrational number and end up with the
circumference rational? Yeah. So, to be
clear, if you want the circum the
circumference could be anything you
want. Could be the number five. Um, I
think what I think the intention of the
phrasing was that the ratio of the
circumference to the diameter could
never be or like if the diameter is a
whole number, the circumference will
never be rational. However you want to
phrase it, it's the relationship between
those two that's fundamentally
irrational. So it's like a like a game
of whack-a-ole. You make one of them a
nice number, the other one looks ugly.
You make one of the other one nice, the
first one becomes ugly. Ugly. It becomes
irrational. Becomes hard to write down.
Um and so it's a very deep question to
try to say why is pi this ratio between
a circle circumference and its diameter
why is that an irrational number? There
is not a podcastable answer that I can
give. This might not be satisfying, but
instead of talking about um circles,
let's talk about squares where if you
have a square and it's got a side length
of one and you ask how far is it to get
from one side length from one uh corner
to the opposite corner, um that ends up
being the square root of two. This is
something that follows from the
Pythagorean theorem. This is another
situation where this geometric length
has an irrational relationship with the
the first length we drew. So the ratio
between that diagonal and the square
side length is the square root of two.
Now that is irrational. It's also much
much easier to prove to you why it must
be irrational. And if you will uh
indulge me, I think it's possible to do
this in like 45 seconds and you can we
can we can see how this goes. All right,
you ready? Here we go. Proof that square
root of two is irrational. Assume that
you could write it down as a rational
number, right? Like maybe you think oh
maybe<unk> of 2 is going to be I don't
know like 5 / 3 or maybe something more
complicated like 153 / 311 like surely I
can find big enough numbers that'll make
this work and I say whatever you choose
we'll write it down as p over q we say
that's the same thing as the<unk> of 2.
What that would mean um first of all
let's assume that it's fully reduced. So
if if you wrote something down like um 4
/ two you could reduce that to be 2 / 1.
So there's no common factor you can
reduce this thing down. So if that was
true, P / Q is the same as the square
root of two. By definition, you're
saying that P ^2 / Q ^2 is equal to 2.
So that's what it would mean by
definition. So that means um when you
like multiply everything out by the
bottom that Q ^2 P ^2 is going to equal
2 * Q ^2. So if this if you could come
up with some numbers where it was true,
you must admit that P ^2 is the same as
2 * Q ^2. that means that P is an even
number because it's two times something.
P must be an even number.
Um, yeah. And so you're like, okay, I
don't know. Let's let's call P uh, you
know, 2 * K or something, right? Um,
it's some even number. If you then write
this down algebraically and you replace
it with 2 * K, you're going to conclude
that Q also has to be an even number.
Because when you take that key equation
P ^2= 2 * Q ^2 that ends up looking like
4 * K^2 = 2 * Q ^2. You divide some
stuff out and you say hey Q also has to
be an even number. So you must conclude
that P is even. You must conclude that Q
is even. But we assumed at the start
that it was a reduced fraction. Both of
those numbers couldn't be even otherwise
it wouldn't have been reduced. So there
there cannot be a way to write it as a
fraction because otherwise you end up in
this infinite regress where somehow both
of them have to be even. But if you
reduce it down now both of those have to
be even and you'll you'll never get to a
coherent answer. It's just a little
weird that to get this irrational number
you have to take the ratio of two
numbers. That's just a that it's a weird
fact. So great. So this is a common
mathematician tool. They say oh you want
to prove that something's impossible,
right? They suspect they're like man
this problem's really hard. I think it
might be impossible. Like they have they
have a big ego and so they want to say
hey it's not that I can't solve it
because I'm dumb. It's because no one
can solve it. So they want to prove that
it's impossible. Classic tactic what you
do is you say I'm going to start by
assuming it's possible like writing some
notation to say what if it was possible
what would follow from that and then you
come to some kind of contradiction. Um
you say so see if we assumed it was
possible we land on this thing that
could never be therefore our assumption
was false. So that's a that's a very
common mathematician thing. I love that
what you just did. I love starting with
the square. That's very cool. Hey Star
Talk fans. I don't know if you know
this, but the audio version of the
podcast actually posts a week in advance
of the video version. And you can get
that and Spotify and Apple Podcast and
most other podcast outlets that are out
there. Multiple ways to ingest all that
is cosmic on Star Talk. I'm Tien from
Vietnam. Uh, if your to journey to flat
land, what shape would you use, I mean,
would you choose to be and what activity
would you like to do there? Thank you.
Longtime fan of Star Talk and both of
you, tell us about Flatland. I happen to
have a copy right here on my desk. Oh.
Oh, really? That's great. Yeah, I've got
one over on the shelf over here. So this
is this is a very classic book where um
the author had you imagine a world
that's just two-dimensional. So here in
three dimensions you can look left,
right, up, down, in and out. But he said
what if you were just on this
two-dimensional world and that's all the
world was. And so you have a bunch of
creatures there. And he was making this
analogy to say like wouldn't it be
really hard to describe
three-dimensional shapes to them? Like
if you have someone who lives in
flatland and you want to describe what a
cube is or a sphere or like a donut,
there are these shapes. You just really
can't describe it to them. And then the
purpose of the book was then to say,
hey, if there's geometric shapes in four
dimensions, we are it is as hard to
describe to us as it is for us to
describe to flatlanders. But to the to
the question on what shape would I be in
flatland?
Um, cir I mean it's kind of basic maybe,
but circle seems useful. You can roll
around. Um, everything's nice and
symmetric. Uh, you can do circle
inversion, which uh, you know, the other
patron boy is certainly going to
appreciate. Um, but uh that's probably
all I got. As I remember the story, the
more sides you had, the more
aristocratic you were. Oh, look at you.
Right. So, a triangle would be like the
lowest the scum of the earth.
Those triangles. I can't believe that.
Trying to move in here. They know
better. And then the squares and then
pentagons, hexagons. So, I think I'd be
a hexagon. Okay. I'd be hexagon. You
want to tessillate the plane? Yes. I
want to look at that. Yeah. Although any
shape can tessillate, right?
Well, not any shape. I mean, you got
your squares, you got your triangles.
No, no, no. I mean, if you look at if
you look at Echer paintings, he is Isn't
that tessillation where you have two
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. two shapes intersect,
right? So, the the difference is I'm a
what they call a regular polygon where
all my sides are equal to each other.
Then it's only the hexagon. But I think
tessillation is all shapes that can do
that is called tessellation. Isn't that
right? Well, not any shape can
tessillate. So you're right. The
pressure shows you've got this infinite
family that can tessellate. I agree. But
yes, like angels and devils
tessillating. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
But that you can test that's called
tessellation, isn't it? Mhm. Yeah. 100%.
Right. Right. So So now if you if you're
going to restrict yourself to a to a
shape to a a polygon, right? What's
called a regular polygon, then we're
limited, right? But so I want to be a
hexagon because you can tile a floor
with a hexagon. Yes, you can. Yeah. And
get other people to tile with you and
you can snuggle and everything fits fits
very very snugly together. Snuggly. Very
cool. So what shape would you be now
that we're talking about tiling? There
was a whole tile that was discovered a
couple years ago. That's a single tile
that tessillates in a non-periodic way
and it can't tessillate in a periodic
but it only tesses non-periodically. I
heard about that. But but is that a
regular polygon or is it just some other
shape? No, no, no. It's a wild It's not
that weird a shape. Uh it it look it
looks like a hat kind of people call it.
Um but what's cool is it was discovered
by an amateur. Um so is this people
didn't know if such a if there was a
shape that um tiles things
non-periodically uh or it tiles things
on periodically without having any
periodic tiling is the like technical
question, but it's just like an
interesting tiling question. An amateur
found it and it became a little fun
celebrity of the math internet for a
couple months back then. So what's the
difference between a periodic and a
non-periodic pattern? Great. So most of
the patterns you can think of are
periodic. Like it's kind of what we mean
by pattern almost. Yeah. Like if you
shift the whole picture and it looks
identical. So you take your hexagon
tiling and then you like shift your view
over by one hexagon, it looks identical.
So that's what we would mean by
periodic. Um it wasn't even known that
you could have a non-periodic tiling uh
for a while. But Penrose, who very
famous for physics reasons, uh he found
a way to use these two tiles that each
look like a rhombus to have a pattern
that fills all of space, but it never
repeats. So it's a it's a it's a
describable pattern. Um you can describe
what it should be, but it never repeats.
So when you shift your viewing point, it
will never look identical. So there's no
way to shift it to be the same as what
it once was. Yeah. It's kind of like how
the digits of pi or these irrational
numbers, they they don't repeat
themselves. They just go on and on in a
predictable way but not that repeats
itself. It's the geometric equivalent of
that. Okay. Very cool. This is William
Walker and William Walker says, "Hello,
gentlemen from Florida from the Florida
panhandle. I've heard it said that
mathematically we know properties some
or all I'm not sure of dimensions higher
than what we
observe. Could you please elaborate upon
this? What can we say about these
dimensions?" Yeah. How do you get there?
Mhm. Great, great, great, great. I think
this is one of the big misconceptions
when mathematicians talk about higher
dimensions. People are like assume that
they are talking about something that
should be physically realized. But so
ultimately when you're doing math,
sometimes you might have something that
can be described by multiple numbers.
You have some system like a I don't know
little particle moving around and you
describe its like velocity with some
list of numbers and its position with
some list of numbers. And you often find
it useful to take all your numbers and
just list them together. And if you have
a list of three numbers, you could think
of it as a point in a three-dimensional
space. If you have a list of two
numbers, you could think of it as a
point in a two-dimensional space
uniquely. But the math uniquely. Yeah.
And mathematicians and physicists um
realize like, hey, sometimes we're
solving a problem and we have a list of
like four numbers or five numbers. And
it was really useful to be able to like
visualize what was going on when it was
a list of three numbers by having this
unique association between a triplet of
numbers and a point in a 3D space.
They're like, why can't we do that? Why
can't we say there's some abstract
four-dimensional space, not in like
physical reality, but that's just going
to represent whatever problem I'm
solving where there's a quadruplet of
numbers that come up. Or in machine
learning these days, right? When a when
a a large language model reads your
text, the first thing it does is it
turns a given word into a really big
list of numbers, like tens of thousands
of numbers. And it's very common for
researchers to think of that as a point
in an insanely highdimensional space and
to use geometric ideas to describe
what's happening to it through the
model. But of course, we're not saying
there's like a 12,000dimensional space
in physical reality. It's just that it's
a nice way to describe um lists of
numbers I have on my shelf here. So
these dimensions are placeholders. What?
I got it on my shelf here. A Klein
bottle bottle opener. I love it. So this
is an attempt to represent a
four-dimensional object in three
dimensions. Yeah. Yeah. So client
bottles are are something that um
they're most comfortable in four
dimensions. This is where they want to
live. And if you try to make them live
in three dimensions, they have to like
unnaturally cross through themselves.
There's no way to put it in three
dimensions without it crossing through
itself. So, the quin bottle is a bottle
that has no inside. Yeah. Yeah. I think
that's a fair way to say it. There's no
You can't distinguish the inside and the
outside. Yeah. I had I had some friends
in college who got in trouble for
trespassing in a certain building and
they um they're like, "Maybe as part of
our defense, we go to the fence outside
the building and we apply one twist to
it so that the whole fence is a moia
strip." And this is another one of those
shapes where there's no clear notion of
an inside or an outside. Like then we
can argue to the authorities that we
couldn't have been inside the
trespassing area because there's no
coherent notion of the inside of the
relevant area. Were these bored Stanford
students? Yeah, these were I don't know
how bored they were, but they were they
were creative Stanford students. Yeah.
Not creative enough not to go to jail
because you're still going down. But
that's clever. You'd have to flip the
fence but then reattach it. Reattach it.
Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. So, in the middle
of the night, you know, while you're
doing whatever you're doing, trespassing
there, just make sure that as you leave,
you like you cut the fence, you twist
the fence, you reattach it so that it's
a moius fence, and then your defense is
solid. So, a climb bottle is a
four-dimensional version of a Mobius
strip kind of. Yeah. I I don't I don't
love that description. I mean, it's what
if you try to take a Mobius strip and
you take another Mobius strip and you
try to glue their edges together, you'll
get a Klein bottle. It's a very mind
warping thing to try to think about. Um,
it's analogous to a mobia strip in that
they both are non-orientable, meaning
you have this notion of no clear inside
or outside, but but they're different.
Like a Klein bottle is closed shape. It
doesn't have an edge. Mobius strip has
an edge. So like topologically, they're
pretty different animals, but they they
like swim in the same waters. Well, it
doesn't have a a 1D edge, but this has a
2D edge, which we which would be a
surface. A surface is an edge in four
dimensions, isn't it? In the same way,
the the 1D edge of a Mobius strip is an
edge in three dimensions. So if if you
live on the Earth, right, and you try to
walk to find the edge of the Earth, it's
a sphere. There is no edge. You're never
going to like go to the edge where all
the water is falling off, right? If if
the if it was a flat disc, you would you
could walk to where the edge is. If
you're a little antobia strip, you can
walk to the edge and like peer off the
edge at some point. If you're walking
around the Klein bottle, you never hit
an edge in that way. It's uh and like
mathematically we call it a closed
surface in this way. So they're both
surfaces. They're both 2D. Okay. So
there's an important distinction. Closed
surface. That's the key. Time for just
one more question. Okay. All right.
Let's go to our old friend Kevin the
Samo. Oh, okay. And Kevin says that's
his last name, the Samo. Okay. The
middle name is the the last name is
Samo. He he says this. Hey, Neil has
touched on the threebody problem in an
explainer episode, but would there be
another branch of mathematics that
hasn't been discovered yet that could
solve it just like Newton did with
motion? In honor of Sir Isaac Newton,
there is a Spanish wine called Principa
Mathematica, which is a bright white
wine made with Charello. I'm going to
find that wine. Yeah. So, so Principia
is his greatest work. Uh, it's the
mathematical principles of natural
philosophy. Uhhuh. Sensibly abbreviated
Principia. Principia. Yeah, but it's
Principia Mathematica. If you want to
give the full thing. Okay. This is
greatest work. If there's a wine with
that name, I'm going to find it. Thank
you. There is a wine with that name.
Samo. So, I like this question because
at what point do you say it's
unsolvable? And at what point do you say
the person who's brilliant enough to
solve it is yet to be born and to apply
their genius to it?
Yeah, I would say there's two different
ways to think about if a problem's hard
to answer. Um, so in the case of Newton
modeling the planets, it wasn't even
known what the right like math to put to
it was. What what mathematic model you
would use to try to make predictions and
his big contribution was to invent the
appropriate field of math that you could
use to then make predictions. a branch
of mathematics that you're not inventing
today. Just thought I'd rub that in
again. Okay. Right. Um and the I mean
the threebody problem feels so different
because it's not that it's like we don't
know what math should describe it. It's
instead saying we know it's an
intrinsically mathematical question. You
say given this piece of math that's
describing it exactly and it's Newtonian
calculus.
um it's known that uh you cannot predict
what's going to happen if you have a
little bit of error in your initial
predictions. So this was the big um
surprise of chaos theory where initially
you might think hey if I know how to
solve an equation or if I have some
equation I have a I'm sufficiently smart
about it then um if I know the initial
state and I just see how the world
evolves according to that equation I can
predict the future and then chaos theory
said there are these situations
including the threebody problem where
even if you exactly know what all the
solutions are if you have a little bit
of error in your measurement that error
blows up so quickly that subject to that
error, the possible states you could end
up with after an like a pretty short
amount of time um span such a wide space
of possibilities that effectively the
outcome is unpredictable. So unless you
had uh infinite precision, which is just
that's not how science or engineering
works at all or planets move, right? So
it's the result is telling it's not that
it's unknown like what the answers will
be. It's known that the answers are
unknowable in a certain way, right? It's
known that it'll be chaotic in the sense
that final outcomes are very sensitive.
So that's not the type of problem
lending itself to this issue, right?
Yeah. We just need a smarter person to
come along. No, because the idea is
this. The answer is it is unknowable.
That is the actual solution. That's the
answer. That's the answer. It's not that
we can't solve it. We did solve it. And
and the solution is excellent. This is
unknown. You agree with that? That's
that's brilliant. That's a great
summary. I think that's a great summary
of chaos. I've I've I've earned my keep
here.
I can go home now. Just barely. I know.
What time is it? Really, Chuck? On the
last question.
One of the things I like most about
mathematics is you get to peer through
doorways in advance of actually stepping
there. Because the math as a model of
reality, speaking as a
scientist, allows you to explore the
world without ever leaving your chair.
If the math is a proper model of the
physical universe, then
you have the power of a god in your hand
by making predictions. If they come
true, that gives you that much more
confidence that the math and the
universe are
one. And with that power, I thrive on
thinking about higher dimensions, a
topic we talked about. What what do
things look like in four dimensions,
five dimensions, six dimensions? You
can't picture that in your head. No. Our
brains evolved on the plains of the
Serengeti trying to not get eaten by
lions. We don't have the capacity to
think that way, but we have the mind
power to calculate that way and to give
us all the information we know about
higher dimensions and other places we
have yet to
visit. And that is a cosmic
perspective. So again, tell us your your
YouTube channel. Yeah, so the YouTube's
channel um it's named Three Blue, One
Brown, an admittedly weird name. You
could also search 3B1B. Um and a lot of
topics that we've discussed here,
flavors of them show up on that channel.
So excellent. And and how else do we
find you on social media? Three blue and
brown on whatever your favorite um
social app is these days. Um so Okay.
Now the three and the and the one are
numerals and the blue and the brown are
words. Yeah, correct. Very hard to
describe the numerals mixed with the
numbers. Yeah. Or just 3B1B. If you
search that, you can usually land on it.
Okay. Well, just congratulations for
your success and and as I say, doing
God's work. Yeah. Cuz can't divide by
zero. So we hope to see more of you.
Keep up the work. And we need more math
fluency in this world. Yes, we do. God,
please just infect the whole country.
Can you please do my best? All right,
Chuck. Always good to have you, man.
Always a pleasure. All right, this has
been Star Talk Cosmic Aquarius
mathematics edition. Neil deGrasse
Tyson. Keep looking up.
[Music]